FR #1090: Proposed Schema Design principles (#1150)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: guidelines/data_model_design_guideline.md

Reviewer: Rename to `data-model-design-guidelines`.

Author: Done

Reviewer: Strike all colons in the headings.

Reviewer: The doc uses `dataset`, `table`, and `entity` as synonyms.  And those are definitely data model synonyms!  But for the sake of clarity and consistency, I think we should stick to using one and only one term -- and the term we've used most so far is `dataset`, so I propose we use that one in all sections after the intro.

Author: Done

Reviewer: The doc refers to the "existing time-series dataset" multiple times.  While I don't feel strongly that we need to future-proof this doc by referring prematurely to "dataset(s)", I _do_ think that this document should set a precedent for naming our "existing time-series dataset".  It will make the language here clearer -- not to mention that it will help folks better understand the concept of multiple datasets.

Author: Agreed, not sure of the name though....going to put in a filler for now.

Author: Committed decided name of the existing dataset: Cost and Usage

# FOCUS Data Model Design Guidelines

> When considering the addition of a new dataset to the FinOps Foundation’s FOCUS specification, which currently consists of a single time-series dataset, the decision should be guided by clear principles to ensure the specification remains coherent, maintainable, and aligned with its goals. Below are some principles to guide when adding a new table is appropriate, tailored to the context of the FOCUS specification and FinOps practices. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When considering the addition of a new dataset to the FinOps Foundation’s FOCUS specification, which currently consists of a single time-series dataset, the decision should be guided by clear principles to ensure the specification remains coherent, maintainable, and aligned with its goals. Below are some principles to guide when adding a new dataset is appropriate, tailored to the context of the FOCUS specification and FinOps practices. 
```
The terms table and dataset are used interchangeably, best if we consistently use dataset.

## Distinct Purpose and Scope:

> A dataset should represent a specific entity/s and unique data domain that cannot be effectively or logically accommodated within the existing time-series dataset.

Author: Lets enhance this to include the stand alone nature of the dataset.

Author: ```suggestion
A dataset should represent a specific entity/s and unique data domain that cannot be effectively or logically accommodated in other Datasets. Dataset exist as stand alone entities.  
```

> A table should serve a separate purpose or represent a unique data domain that cannot be effectively or logically accommodated within the existing time-series dataset.

Reviewer 3: Maybe also note that such datasets are often already modeled as standalone — not just because they don’t fit the time-series structure.

Author: See updates.

> A table should serve a separate purpose or represent a unique data domain that cannot be effectively or logically accommodated within the existing time-series dataset.

Reviewer: Let's take shared cost allocation as an example.  It could certainly be "effectively or logically accommodated within the existing time-series dataset".  So, which principle would we be following if we broke it out into its own dataset?  We may need another principle, or add clarity to an existing one.

Author: I put in another example here. Leaving open because we should run through that example.

   
### Rationale:

> Everything has a place and everything in its place. Datasets should represent distinct entities or constructs that have their own data, metaddata, lifecycle, granularity, and data structure. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Everything has a place and everything in its place. Datasets should represent distinct entities or constructs that have their own data, metadata, lifecycle, granularity, and data structure. 
```

> The FOCUS specification aims to standardize cloud cost and usage data. Tables should address a specific FinOps use case (e.g., cost allocation, forecasting, or resource metadata) that requires different attributes, granularity, or structure than the current time-series data.

Reviewer: The mention of `specific FinOps use case` feels awkward here, given that the following principle is geared specifically around use cases.  How can `Distinct Purpose and Scope` be more clearly delineated from `Alignment with FinOps Use Cases`?

Author: Check out the changes to address this.

### Example:

> If the current table captures usage and cost metrics over time, a new table might be justified for static metadata (e.g. account details, or pricing rules) that isn’t time-dependent and doesn’t fit the time-series structure.

Reviewer 3: Note: Some of those datasets are also time-related — it might be clearer to say they have different temporal granularity (e.g. monthly or long-term validity), rather than implying they’re not time-dependent at all.

Author: Put in a name filler because we need to give the current dataset an actual name.

> If a supported features is added to show invoices and their associated data, a new dataset might be justified to capture invoice information (e.g., invoice number, date, total amount, payment status, finalization status). Because this data is not in alignment with the charge records in the current FOCUS dataset, a new dataset would be appropriate to capture this information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a supported feature is added to show invoices and their associated data, a new dataset might be justified to capture invoice information (e.g., invoice number, date, total amount, payment status, finalization status). Because this data is not in alignment with the charge records in the current FOCUS dataset, a new dataset would be appropriate to capture this information.
```

## Alignment with FinOps Use Cases:

The new dataset should directly support one or more core FinOps practices, such as cost allocation, optimization, forecasting, or reporting, as defined by the FinOps Foundation.

### Rationale:

The FOCUS specification is designed to enable FinOps practitioners to manage cloud costs effectively. Any new dataset should map to specific entity that is relevant to FinOps.

### Example:

A dataset for anomaly detection (e.g., unexpected cost spikes) or reserved instance utilization might be justified if it supports optimization workflows not adequately addressed by the time-series data.

## Data Granularity and Structure:

Datasets should bear the responsibility of representing a specific entity or construct and its data. These entities and therefore their datasets have a distinct represented granularity, structure, or lifecycle that justifies its separation from the <existing time-series name here> dataset.

### Rationale:

> Different datasets represent different entities and may require different datasets may require different levels of detail, update frequencies, or lifecycle. A new dataset may be appropriate if it captures data at a different granularity (e.g., daily vs. monthly) or has a different temporal nature (e.g., static vs. dynamic). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Different datasets represent different entities and may require different levels of detail, update frequencies, or lifecycle. A new dataset may be appropriate if it captures data at a different granularity (e.g., daily vs. monthly) or has a different temporal nature (e.g., static vs. dynamic). 
```

### Example:

A table representing the overtime charges for a vendor represents a charge entity. A table that represents invoices is not the same entity and therefore could be considered appropriate to add as a separate table, should invoices need to be represented as a dedicated entity.

## Interoperability and Integration:

> Tables should integrate seamlessly with the existing dataset, maintaining consistency in terminology, keys, and standards as defined by the FOCUS specification. Linkages to other tables in a primary key and foreign key nature should be identified. Uniqueness scope must be determined and adhered too.

Reviewer: I think we have to give a bit of context when using data modeling terms.  For example:

```suggestion
Tables should integrate seamlessly with the existing dataset, maintaining consistency in terminology, keys, and standards as defined by the FOCUS specification. Linkages to other tables in a [primary key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_key) and [foreign key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_key) nature should be identified. Uniqueness scope must be determined and adhered too.
```

> Datasets should integrate seamlessly with the <existing dataset name here>, maintaining consistency in terminology, keys, and standards as defined by the FOCUS specification. Linkages to other datasets in a [primary key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_key) and [foreign key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_key) nature should be identified. Uniqueness scope must be determined and adhered too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasets should integrate seamlessly with the <existing dataset name here>, maintaining consistency in terminology, keys, and standards as defined by the FOCUS specification. Linkages to other datasets in a [primary key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_key) and [foreign key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_key) nature should be identified. Uniqueness scope must be determined and adhered to.
```

### Rationale:

The FOCUS specification emphasizes interoperability across cloud providers and tools. A new table should use consistent identifiers (e.g., resource IDs, billing account IDs) and align with the specification’s data model to ensure it can be joined or correlated with the existing table.

### Example:

A new table for vendor-specific pricing data should include standardized keys to link it to the time-series usage data, enabling cross-referencing for cost analysis.

## Scalability and Maintainability:

The addition of a new table should not overly complicate facilitating supported features, substantially increase query complexity, or create significant maintenance burdens for implementers. This is not to say that the introduction of a new table shouldn't cause impact to existing implementations, but rather that the impact should be manageable and justified by the value it provides.

### Rationale:

Adding tables increases the complexity of data ingestion, validation, and processing for FinOps tools and teams. A table should be justified by its value and designed to minimize overhead (e.g., clear schema, minimal dependencies).

### Example:

> While we could add a tags table that is an overtime history of all relevant tags for a resource the usability as it relates to tracking cost and usage.

Reviewer: Grammar issue here.  Not sure exactly how to clean it up...

## Consistency and Conflicting Data:

> Datasets should provide a clear and consistent view of data without conflicting information. If a new dataset introduces potential conflicts with existing datasets, it should be avoided or designed to resolve those conflicts. Datasets with linked logic such as over time charges in one and aggregated summations in another dataset should tie out. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasets should provide a clear and consistent view of data without conflicting information. If a new dataset introduces potential conflicts with existing datasets, it should be avoided or designed to resolve those conflicts. Datasets with related logic, such as charges over time in one and aggregated sums in another, should reconcile with each other. 
```

### Rationale:

FinOps practitioners rely on FOCUS datasets as sources of truth, should two tables provide the same data, there is a risk of introducing inconsistencies or confusion. A new table should not contradict existing data unless it provides a clear resolution or additional context.

### Example:

A summary table for executive dashboards might be justified if it reduces query times for high-level cost reports compared to querying the detailed time-series data.

> ## Avoid Redundancy:

Reviewer: This principle feels like it overlaps pretty heavily with the previous one, `consistency and conflicting data`.  Maybe collapse?

Author: Yeah lets discuss this.

> ## Avoid Redundancy:

Reviewer 3: #### Assumption

**SKU Price Details** already contains all or most of the pricing information that would be included in a potential standalone **Pricing dataset**.

#### Discussion topic/question:

According to the Avoid Redundancy principle, introducing a separate Pricing dataset would only be justified if it brings significant added value.
If we do decide to introduce such a dataset, it would be helpful to clarify the intended role of the existing SKU Price Details column — whether it remains, is reduced, or removed altogether.

Author: This is really about what the presence of the dataset itself is fulfilling from a supported feature. It would be up to the us to determine based on the principles if the supported features necessitates another dataset. In this specific case we would need to weigh if the removal causes undo impact on the complexity of using the specification.

The new table must not duplicate data or functionality already available in the existing dataset unless it provides significant value through a different perspective or aggregation.

### Rationale:

Redundant tables increase complexity, maintenance overhead, and the risk of inconsistencies. Ensure the new table adds unique value, such as summarizing data for specific analyses (e.g., aggregated spend by business unit) or capturing data not feasible in the current schema.

### Example:

Instead of adding a table that repeats time-series cost data, consider whether the existing table can be extended with new columns or whether the new table addresses a fundamentally different need, like contract or licensing data.

## Future-Proofing and Flexibility:

> The addition of a table can be done when needed to accommodate both current and future supported features or data model needs.

Reviewer: This needs a rephrase to follow the same normative format as the other ones.  For example:

```suggestion
A new dataset should accommodate both current and future supported features or data model needs.
```

That said, this principle feels pretty squishy to me.  What would a violation of this principle look like?

### Rationale:

Cloud environments evolve rapidly, and the FOCUS specification must remain adaptable. A new table should be flexible enough to handle foreseeable changes without requiring frequent restructuring.

### Example:

> A table for multi-cloud or hybrid cloud cost data might be added to support organizations using multiple providers, with a schema that can adapt to new cloud services.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if I’m misunderstanding something, but consider revisiting the example. Since FOCUS is already designed as a multi-cloud spec, “multi-cloud” might not be the best way to illustrate future-proofing.

Author: Yeah that was included by mistake...I put a better one in place.

> Cloud environments evolve rapidly, and the FOCUS specification must remain adaptable. A new table should be flexible enough to handle foreseeable changes without requiring frequent restructuring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cloud environments evolve rapidly, and the FOCUS specification must remain adaptable. A new dataset should be flexible enough to handle foreseeable changes without requiring frequent restructuring.
```
The terms table and dataset are used interchangeably, best if we consistently use dataset.

## Compliance with FOCUS Design Goals:

> The new table must align with the FOCUS specification’s core design goals, such as simplicity (wink), consistency, and vendor neutrality.

Reviewer: We should link to the core design goals.  This makes me notice that the core design goals are in `overview.md`, and we might want to move them into the `guidelines` folder, now that we have that...

```suggestion
The new table must align with the FOCUS specification’s [core design goals](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/multiple_table_principles/specification/overview.md#design-principles), such as simplicity (wink), consistency, and vendor neutrality.
```
